# Business models for open-source software.

 (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_models_for_open-source_software)

### Table of Contents

| Contents | --- |
| --- | --- |
| --- | **[About](#about)** |
| - 1	| **[Funding](#funding)** |
| - 2	| **[Challenges](#challenges)** |
| - 3	| **[Approaches](#approaches)** |
| - 3.1	| **[Dual-licensing](#dual-licensing)** |
| - 3.2	| **[Selling professional services](#selling-professional-services)** |
| - 3.3	| **[Selling of branded merchandise](#selling-of-branded-merchandise)** |
| - 3.4	| **[Selling of certificates and trademark use](#selling-of-certificates-and-trademark-use)** |
| - 3.5	| **[Selling software as a service](#selling-software-as-a-service)** |
| - 3.6	| **[Partnership with funding organizations](#partnership-with-funding-organizations)** |
| - 3.7	| **[Voluntary donations](#voluntary-donations)** |
| - 3.8	| **[Bounty driven development](#bounty-driven-development)** |
| - 3.9	| **[Preorder-crowdfunding-reverse-bounty model](#preorder-crowdfunding-reverse-bounty-model)** |
| - 3.10	| **[Advertising-supported software](#advertising-supported-software)** |
| - 3.11	| **[Selling of optional proprietary extensions](#selling-of-optional-proprietary-extensions)** |
| - 3.12	| **[Selling of required proprietary parts of a software product](#selling-of-required-proprietary-parts-of-a-software-product)** |
| - 3.13	| **[Relicensing under a proprietary license](#relicensing-under-a-proprietary-license)** |
| - 3.14	| **[Obfuscation of source code](#obfuscation of source code)** |
| - 3.15	| **[Delayed open-sourcing](#delayed-open-sourcing)** |
| - 3.16	| **[Open sourcing on end-of-life](#open-sourcing-on-end-of-life)** |
| - 4	| **[FOSS and economy](#FOSS-and-economy)** |
| - 5	| **[Examples](#examples)** |
| - 6	| **[See also](#see also)** |
| - 7	| **[References](#references)** |
| - 8	| **[Further reading](#further reading)** |
| --- | --- |

# About 

Open-source software is widely used both as independent applications and as components in non-open-source applications. Many independent software vendors (ISVs), value-added resellers (VARs), and hardware vendors (OEMs or ODMs) use open-source frameworks, modules, and libraries inside their proprietary, for-profit products and services.[1] From a customer's perspective, the ability to use open technology under standard commercial terms and support is valuable. They are willing to pay for the legal protection (e.g., indemnification from copyright or patent infringement), "commercial-grade QA", and professional support/training/consulting that are typical of commercial software, while also receiving the benefits of fine-grained control and lack of lock-in that comes with open-source.

# Funding 

Much unlike proprietary off-the-shelf software that come with restrictive licenses, open-source software is distributed freely, through the web and in physical media. Because creators cannot require each user to pay a license fee to fund development this way, a number of alternative development funding models have emerged.

An example of those funding models is when bespoke software is developed as a consulting project for one or more customers who request it. These customers pay developers to have this software developed according to their own needs and they could also closely direct the developers' work. If both parties agree, the resulting software could then be publicly released with an open-source license in order to allow subsequent adoption by other parties. That agreement could reduce the costs paid by the clients while the original developers (or independent consultants) can then charge for training, installation, [support]([technical)], or further customization if and when more interested customers would choose to use it after the initial release.

There also exist [to support the development of open source software, such as [[Google]([stipend]]s)]'s [of Code]([Summer)].<ref name="LinSOC">{{cite web | title = Google's Summer of Code concludes | first = Bruce | last = Byfield | date= 21 September 2005 | url = https://www.linux.com/news/googles-summer-code-concludes | quote = DiBona said that the SOC was designed to benefit everyone involved in it. Students had the chance to work on real projects, rather than academic ones, and to get paid while gaining experience and making contacts. FOSS projects benefited from getting new code and having the chance to recruit new developers. | publisher = [| accessdate = 18 June 2016}}</ref>

Another approach to funding is to provide the software freely, but sell licenses to proprietary add-ons such as data libraries. For instance, an open-source [[computer-aided design|CAD]([linux.com]])] program may require parts libraries which are sold on a subscription or flat-fee basis. Open-source software can also promote the sale of specialized hardware that it interoperates with, some example cases being the [(PBX)|Asterisk]([Asterisk)] telephony software developed by PC-telephony hardware manufacturer [and the [[Robot Operating System]([Digium]])] (ROS) robotics platform by Willow Garage and Stanford AI Labs. Many open source software projects have begun as research projects within universities, as personal projects of students or professors, or as tools to aid scientific research. The influence of universities and research institutions on open-source shows in the number of projects named after their host institutions, such as [Unix]([BSD)], [Common Lisp]([CMU)], or the [HTTPd]([NCSA)] which evolved into [Web server|Apache]([Apache)].

Companies may employ developers to work on open-source projects that are useful to the company's infrastructure: in this case, it is developed not as a product to be sold but as a sort of shared public utility. A local bug-fix or solution to a software problem, written by a developer either at a company's request or to make his/her own job easier, can be released as an open-source contribution without costing the company anything.<ref>{{cite journal | last = Holtgrewe | first = Ursula | title = Articulating the Speed(s) of the Internet: The Case of Open Source/Free Software | journal = [& Society]([Time)] | date = March 2004 | volume = 13 | pages = 129–146 | doi = 10.1177/0961463X04040750}}</ref> A larger project such as the Linux kernel may have contributors from dozens of companies which use and depend upon it, as well as hobbyist and research developers.

A new funding approach for open-source projects is [organized over web platforms like [[Kickstarter]([crowdfunding]],)], [or [[Bountysource]([Indiegogo]],)].<ref name="yahoofinance">{{cite web | url = http://finance.yahoo.com/news/bountysource-raises-1-1-million-130000440.html | title = Bountysource Raises $1.1 Million for the First Crowdfunding Platform for Open-Source Software Projects | website = Yahoo Finance | publisher = Marketwired | date = 16 July 2013 | accessdate = 18 June 2016}}</ref>

# Challenges 

[software]([Open-source)] can be sold and used in general [Also, commercial open-source applications have been a part of the [[software industry]([Commerce|commercially]].)] for some time.<ref name="Popp1"/><ref>{{cite web | url = http://timreview.ca/article/229 | title = F/LOSS is Commercial Software | date = February 2009 | accessdate = 18 June 2016 | first = David A. | last = Wheeler | website = Technology Innovation Management Review | publisher = Talent First Network}}</ref> While commercialization or funding of open-source software projects is possible, it is considered challenging.<ref name="LAS300RMS">{{cite AV media | first = Richard | last = Stallman | date = 11 March 2012 | title = Richard Stallman (S20E10) | type = Podcast | url = https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=radmjL5OIaA&t=0h53m46s | access-date = 18 June 2016 | time = 0:53:46 | quote = I'm not going to claim that I got a way to make it easier to raise money to pay people who write free software. We all know, that to some extent there are ways to do that, but we all know that they are limited, they are not as broad as we would like. | publisher = [Broadcasting]([Jupiter)] | series = The Linux Action Show}}</ref>

Since several [license]([open-source)]s stipulate that authors of derivative works must distribute them under an open-source ([license, ISVs and VARs have to develop new legal and technical mechanisms to foster their commercial goals,<ref name="Popp2">{{cite book | first = Dr. Karl Michael | last = Popp | title = Best Practices for commercial use of open source software | year = 2015 | publisher = Books on Demand | location = Norderstedt, Germany | isbn = 978-3738619096}}</ref> as many traditional mechanisms are not directly applicable anymore.

Traditional business wisdom suggests that a company's methods, assets, and intellectual properties should remain concealed from market competitors ([[trade secret]([copyleft]]))]) as long as possible to maximize the profitable commercialization time of a new product.<ref>{{Cite journal | first = S. | last = Donovan | title = Patent, copyright and trade secret protection for software | journal = IEEE Potentials | volume = 13 | issue = 3 | publication-date = 1994 | page = 20 | quote = Essentially there are only three ways to protect computer software under the law: patent it, register a copyright for it, or keep it as a trade secret. | date = 6 August 2002 | issn = 0278-6648 | doi = 10.1109/45.310923}}</ref> Open-source software development minimizes the effectiveness of this tactic; development of the product is usually performed in view of the public, allowing competing projects or [(computing)|clones]([Clone)] to incorporate new features or improvements as soon as the public code repository is updated, as permitted by most open-source licenses.  Also in the computer hardware domain, a hardware producer who provides free and open software drivers reveals the knowledge about hardware implementation details to competitors, who might use this knowledge to catch up.

Therefore, there is considerable debate about whether vendors can make a sustainable business from an open-source strategy. In terms of a traditional software company, this is probably the wrong question to ask. Looking at the landscape of open source applications, many of the larger ones are sponsored (and largely written) by system companies such as [[IBM]] who may not have an objective of software license revenues. Other software companies, such as Oracle and Google, have sponsored or delivered significant open-source code bases. These firms' motivation tends to be more strategic, in the sense that they are trying to change the rules of a marketplace and reduce the influence of vendors such as Microsoft. Smaller vendors doing open-source work may be less concerned with immediate revenue growth than developing a large and loyal community, which may be the basis of a corporate valuation at merger time.

# Approaches 

A variety of open-source compatible business approaches have gained prominence in recent years{{According to whom|date=October 2013}}; notable examples include [licensing]([dual)], [as a service]([software)], [open source|not charging for the software but for services]([Professional)], [donation-based funding, and [[crowdfunding]([freemium]],)].

There are several different types of [model]([business)]s for making [(economics)|profit]([Profit)] using [software]([open-source)] (OSS) or [the creation. Below are existing and legal commercial business approaches in context of open-source software and open-source licenses.<ref name="Popp2"/> The acceptance of these approaches varies; some of these approaches are recommended (like selling services), others are accepted, while still others are considered controversial or even unethical by the open-source community. The underlying objective of these [[business model]([funding]])]s is to harness the size and international scope of the [community]([open-source)] (typically more than an order of magnitude larger than what would be achieved with [models) for a sustainable commercial venture.{{citation needed|date=October 2013}} The vast majority of commercial open-source companies experience a conversion ratio (as measured by the percentage of downloaders who buy something) well below 1%, so low-cost and highly-scalable marketing and sales functions are key to these firms' profitability.{{citation needed|date=October 2013}}

## Dual-licensing 

[[Dual licensing]([closed-source]])] offers the software under an [license]([open-source)] but also under separate proprietary license terms. The proprietary version can be sold to finance the continued development of the free open-source version.<ref name="ReferenceC">{{cite book | first = Jean | last = Solatan | title = Advances in software economics: A reader on business models and Partner Ecosystems in the software industry | year = 2011 | publisher = BOD | location = Norderstedt, Germany | isbn = 978-3-8448-0405-8}}</ref> Customers can be attracted to a no-cost and open-source edition, then be part of an [to a commercial enterprise edition. Further, customers will learn of open-source software in a company's portfolio and offerings but generate business in other proprietary products and solutions, including commercial [[technical support]([Upselling|up-sell]])] contracts and services. A popular example is [Corporation|Oracle]([Oracle)]'s [[[database]([MySQL]])] which is dual-licensed under a commercial proprietary license as also under the [web | url = http://www.mysql.com/about/legal/licensing/oem/#5 | title = Commercial License for OEMs, ISVs and VARs | at = Q4: What is Oracle's dual license model for MySQL software? | website = MySQL.com | publisher = [[Oracle Corporation|Oracle]([GPLv2]].<ref>{{cite)] | date = July 2010 | accessdate = 18 June 2016 | quote = Oracle makes its MySQL database server and MySQL Client Libraries available under both the GPL and a commercial license. As a result, developers who use or distribute open source applications under the GPL can use the GPL-licensed MySQL software, and OEMs, ISVs and VARs that do not want to combine or distribute the MySQL software with their own commercial software under a GPL license can purchase a commercial license.}}</ref> Another example is the [License]([Sleepycat)]. [(web framework)|Flask]([Flask)] developer Armin Ronacher stated that the [General Public License|AGPL]([Affero)]v3 was a "terrible success" as "vehicle for dual commercial licensing" and noted that [[[RethinkDB]([MongoDB]],)], [[[SugarCRM]([OpenERP]],)] as well as [utilizing the license for this purpose.<ref>{{cite web | url = http://lucumr.pocoo.org/2013/7/23/licensing/ | title = Licensing in a Post Copyright World | date = 23 July 2013 | first = Armin | last = Ronacher | at = What Changed in 2007 | website = Armin Ronacher's Thoughts and Writings | accessdate = 18 June 2016 | quote = The AGPLv3 was a terrible success, especially among the startup community that found the perfect base license to make dual licensing with a commercial license feasible. MongoDB, RethinkDB, OpenERP, SugarCRM as well as WURFL all now utilize the AGPLv3 as a vehicle for dual commercial licensing. The AGPLv3 makes that generally easy to accomplish as the original copyright author has the rights to make a commercial license possible but nobody who receives the sourcecode itself through the APLv3 inherits that right. I am not sure if that was the intended use of the license, but that's at least what it's definitely being used for now.}}</ref>

## Selling professional services 

The [[financial return]([WURFL]])] of [on open-source software can also come from selling [[Service (economics)|services]([cost]]s)], such as training, [support]([technical)], or [technology consulting|consulting]([Information)], rather than the software itself.<ref>[foss-enterprise-pay-or-not-pay](https://www.linux.com/news/foss-enterprise-pay-or-not-pay) on linux.com</ref><ref>{{cite web | url = http://www.linuxinsider.com/story/79341.html | title = FOSS in the Enterprise: To Pay or Not to Pay? | date = 5 November 2013 | first = Jack M. | last = Germain | website = LinuxInsider | publisher = ECT News Network, Inc. | accessdate = 18 June 2016}}</ref><ref>{{cite web | url = http://www.cio.com/article/2388344/open-source-tools/6-reasons-to-pay-for-open-source-software.html | title = 6 Reasons to Pay for Open Source Software | date = 13 February 2013 | first = Paul | last = Rubens | website = CIO | publisher = CXO Media Inc. | accessdate = 18 June 2016 | quote = Open source software is free to download, modify and use, but that doesn't mean it's not worth paying for sometimes. If you're using open source software in a commercial, enterprise capacity, here are six reasons why you should pay for free software.}}</ref>

Another possibility is offering open-source software in [code]([source)] form only, while providing [binaries to paying customers only, offering the commercial service of [[compiling]([executable]])] and [(package management system)|packaging]([package)] of the software. Also, providing goods like physical [storage device|installation media]([Data)] (e.g., [can be a commercial service.

Open-source companies using this business model successfully are for instance [[RedHat]([DVD]]s))] and [news | url = http://www.wired.com/2012/03/red-hat/ | title = Red Hat Becomes Open Source’s First $1 Billion Baby | first = Robert | last = McMillan | date = 28 March 2012 | accessdate = 18 June 2016 | publisher = [[Wired (website)|Wired]([IBM]];<ref>{{cite)] | quote = Other companies have made big money selling Linux — Intel, IBM, Dell, and others have used it as a way to sell hardware and support services — but Red Hat has managed the tricky business of building a software platform that big businesses will pay for.}}</ref> a more specialized example is that of [Analytics]([Revolution)].

## Selling of branded merchandise 

Some open-source organizations such as the [Foundation]([Mozilla)]<ref>{{cite web | url = http://www.mozillazine.org/articles/article4484.html | title = Mozilla Foundation Open Letter Orders Unofficial Mozilla Merchandise Sellers to Stop, Legal Action Hinted | first = Gervase | last = Markham | date = 16 March 2004 | accessdate = 18 June 2016 | website = MozillaZine}}</ref> and the [Foundation]([Wikimedia)]<ref>{{cite web | url = https://store.wikimedia.org/ | title = Wikipedia Store | publisher = Wikimedia Foundation | year = 2016 | accessdate = 18 June 2016}}</ref> sell branded merchandise articles like [and coffee mugs. This can be also seen as an additional service provided to the [[user community]([t-shirt]]s)].

## Selling of certificates and trademark use 

Another financing approach is innovated by [an open source [[learning management system]([Moodle]],)] and community platform.<ref>{{cite web | url = https://opensource.com/education/14/10/open-access-learning-moodle | title = Moodle will always be an open source project | date = 6 October 2014 | first = Samantha | last = Gartner | website = opensource.com | accessdate = 18 June 2016}}</ref><ref>{{cite web | url = http://oss-watch.ac.uk/resources/cs-moodle | title = Moodle: a case study in sustainability | date = 22 January 2014 | publication-date = 5 June 2007 | first = Martin | last = Dougiamas | website = OSS Watch | publisher = University of Oxford | accessdate = 18 June 2016}}</ref> The business model revolves around a network of commercial partners<ref>{{cite web | url = http://moodle.com/partners/about/ | archive-url = https://web.archive.org/web/20140722023159/http://moodle.com/partners/about/ | dead-url = yes | archive-date = 22 July 2014 | title = How do the Moodle Partners work? | year = 2012 | website = Moodle | accessdate = 18 June 2016}}</ref> who are certificated and therefore authorised to use the Moodle [and [[logo]([Trademark|name]])],<ref>{{cite web | url = https://moodle.com/trademarks/ | title = The Moodle Trademark | year = 2016 | website = Moodle | accessdate = 18 June 2016}}</ref> and in turn provide a proportion of revenue to the Moodle Trust, which funds core development.<ref>{{cite web | url = http://www.insidehighered.com/news/2012/03/27/blackboard-buys-moodlerooms-creates-open-source-division | title = Blackboard's Open-Source Pivot | website = Inside Higher Ed | date = 27 March 2012 | first = Steve | last = Kolowich | accessdate = 18 June 2016}}</ref>

## Selling software as a service 

Selling [business model|subscriptions]([subscription)] for online accounts and server access to customers is a way of making profit based on open-source software. Also, combining desktop software with a service, called [plus services]([software)]. Providing [computing]([cloud)] services or [as a service]([software)] (SaaS) without the release of the open-source software itself, neither in binary nor in source form, conforms with most open-source licenses (with exception of the [General Public License|AGPL]([Affero)]).

Because of its lack of software freedoms, [Stallman]([Richard)] calls SaaS "inherently bad" while acknowledging its legality.<ref>{{cite web | url = https://gigaom.com/2013/08/06/hactivist-richard-stallman-takes-on-proprietary-software-saas-and-open-source/ | title = Hacktivist Richard Stallman takes on proprietary software, SaaS and open source | first = Rani | last = Molla | date = 6 August 2013 | website = Gigaom | publisher = Knowingly, Inc. | accessdate = 18 June 2016 | quote = He (...) claims software as a service (SaaS) is inherently bad because your information goes through a server beyond your control and that server can add additional software when it likes.}}</ref><ref>{{cite news | url = https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2008/sep/29/cloud.computing.richard.stallman | title = Cloud computing is a trap, warns GNU founder Richard Stallman | first = Bobbie | last = Johnson | publisher = [Guardian]([The)] | date = 29 September 2008 | accessdate = 18 June 2016 | quote = Web-based programs like Google's Gmail will force people to buy into locked, proprietary systems that will cost more and more over time, according to the free software campaigner}}</ref> The FSF called the [use-case without release of the source-code the "[[Application service provider|ASP]([server-side]])] loophole in the GPLv2" and encourage therefore the use of the [General Public License]([Affero)] which plugged this hole in 2002.<ref name="fsf">{{cite web | url = https://www.gnu.org/licenses/index.html | title = Licenses | at = The GNU Affero General Public License | publisher = Free Software Foundation | website = GNU Project | accessdate = 18 June 2016 | quote = We recommend that people consider using the GNU AGPL for any software which will commonly be run over a network.}}</ref><ref>{{cite web | url = https://opensource.org/node/152 | title = GNU Affero GPL version 3 and the "ASP loophole" | date = 7 June 2007 | first = Michael | last = Tiemann | publisher = [Source Initiative]([Open)] | accessdate = 18 June 2016}}</ref> In 2007 the FSF contemplated  including the special provision of AGPLv1 into [but ultimately decided to keep the licenses separate.<ref>{{cite web | url = https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-faq.html#SeparateAffero | title = Frequently Asked Questions about the GNU Licenses | at = Why did you decide to write the GNU Affero GPLv3 as a separate license? | date = 26 May 2016 | website = GNU Project | publisher = [[Free Software Foundation]([GPLv3]])] | accessdate = 18 June 2016}}</ref>

## Partnership with funding organizations 

Other financial situations include partnerships with other companies. [[[universities]([Governments]],)], companies, and non-governmental organizations may develop internally or hire a contractor for custom in-house modifications, then release that code under an open-source license. Some organizations support the development of open-source software by [or [[stipend]([grants]])]s, like [[[Summer of Code]([Google|Google's]])] initiative founded in 2005.<ref name="LinSOC"/>

## Voluntary donations 

Also, there were experiments by Independent developers to fund development of open-source software [directly by the users, e.g., with the [[Illumination Software Creator]([donation]]-driven)] in 2012.<ref>{{cite web|url=http://www.omgubuntu.co.uk/2012/06/help-linux-tycoon-more-go-open-source |publisher=OMGUbuntu |first=Joey-Elijah |last=Sneddon |date=2012-06-01 |accessdate=2013-08-08 |title=Will You Help Change The Way Open-Source Apps are Funded? |quote=Lunduke is pledging to open-source and distribute his portfolio of hitherto paid software – which includes the Linux distro management simulator Linux Tycoon -  for free, under the GPL, if he can reach a donation-driven funding goal of $4000/m. Reaching this goal, Lunduke says, 'will provide proof for others, who would also like to move their software businesses to be open source, that it is doable.'}}</ref> [for example, allows users to donate money to the projects it hosts that opt to accept donations.<ref>[http://sourceforge.net/apps/trac/sourceforge/wiki/Donations SourceForge.net Donation System]([SourceForge]],) on sourceforge.net</ref> Internet [systems like [[PayPal]([micro-payment]]s)], [and [[Bitcoin]([flattr]],)] help this approach.

Larger donation campaigns also exist. In 2004 the [Foundation]([Mozilla)] carried out a fundraising campaign to support the launch of the [1.0 [[web browser]([Firefox]])]. It placed a two-page ad in the December 16 edition of the ''[York Times]([New)]'' listing the names of the thousands who had donated.<ref name="Mozilla Foundation">{{cite web|url=http://www-archive.mozilla.org/press/mozilla-2004-12-15.html |title=Mozilla Foundation Places Two-Page Advocacy Ad in the New York Times |accessdate=June 15, 2010 |author=Mozilla Foundation |date=December 15, 2004}}</ref><ref>{{cite web|url=http://news.cnet.com/New-York-Times-runs-Firefox-ad/2100-1032_3-5493774.html|title=New York Times runs Firefox ad|date=2004-12-16 |accessdate=2013-08-12|first=Ingrid |last=Marson |quote=Fans of the Mozilla Foundation's Firefox browser who funded an advertisement in The New York Times will finally get to see their names in print on Thursday.|publisher=[

## Bounty driven development 

The users of a particular software artifact may come together and pool money into an [[open-source bounty]([cnet.com]]}}</ref>)] for the implementation of a desired feature or functionality. Offering [(reward)|bounties]([bounty)] as funding has existed for some time. For instance, [is a web platform which has offered this funding model for open source software since 2003.

Another bounty source is companies or foundations that set up bounty programs for implemented features or bugfixes in open-source software relevant to them. For instance, [[Mozilla Foundation|Mozilla]([Bountysource]])] has been paying and funding freelance open-source programmers for [bug]([security)] hunting and fixing since 2004.<ref>{{citation|title=Mozilla to pay bounty on bugs|url=http://www.securityfocus.com/news/9255|author=Leyden, John|publisher=[Register]([The)] |date=2004-08-03 |accessdate=2013-08-10}}</ref><ref>{{cite web |url=http://news.cnet.com/2100-7350_3-5802411.html |title=Offering a bounty for security bugs |last=Evers |first=Joris |date=July 25, 2005 |website=[|publisher=[[CBS Interactive]([CNET]])] |accessdate=12 August 2007}}</ref><ref>{{cite web |url=http://www.mozilla.org/en-US/press/mozilla-2004-08-02.html |title=Mozilla Foundation Announces Security Bug Bounty Program |author=<!--Staff writer(s); no by-line.--> |date=August 2, 2004 |website=[Foundation]([Mozilla)] |location=[View, California]([Mountain)] |accessdate=2013-08-10}}</ref>

## Pre-order/crowdfunding/reverse-bounty model 

A newer funding opportunity for open-source software projects is [which shares similarities with the [[pre-order]([crowdfunding]],)] or [business model, as well as the reverse bounty model. It is typically organized over web platforms like [[Kickstarter]([Praenumeration]])],<ref>{{cite web|url=http://www.networkworld.com/community/blog/open-source-gets-its-own-crowd-funding-site-bounties-included |title=Open source gets its own crowd-funding site, with bounties included - Bountysource is the crowd-funding site the open source community has been waiting for. |first=Bryan |last=Lunduke |date=2013-08-07 |accessdate=2013-08-10 |quote=Many open source projects (from phones to programming tools) have taken to crowd-funding sites (such as Kickstarter and indiegogo) in order to raise the cash needed for large-scale development. And, in some cases, this has worked out quite well.|publisher=networkworld.com}}</ref> [name="mesacrowdfunding"/> or [[Bountysource]([Indiegogo]],<ref)]<ref name="yahoofinance"/> (see also [of crowd funding services]([comparison)]). An example is a successfully funded Indiegogo campaign of Australian programmer Timothy Arceri, who offered for $2,500 to implement in two weeks an [4.3 extension for the [[Mesa (computer graphics)|Mesa]([OpenGL]])] library.<ref name="mesacrowdfunding">{{cite web|url=http://www.indiegogo.com/projects/help-improve-opengl-support-for-the-linux-graphics-drivers|title=Help improve OpenGL support for the Linux Graphics Drivers |first=Timothy |last=Arceri |date=2013-07-26 |accessdate=2013-08-11 |publisher=[|quote=Helping fund the time for me to become a Mesa contributor and document the experience to make it easier for others to understand where to start with the Mesa codebase. Many people have brought up the idea of crowd sourcing open source driver development. This is a small scale experiment to see if it could actually work.}}</ref> Arceri delivered the OpenGL extension code, which got merged into Mesa, and continued later his Mesa work with successive crowdfunding campaigns.<ref>[https://www.phoronix.com/scan.php?page=news_item&px=MTUxMTQ Crowd-Funding Is Back For Another Mesa Extension]([Indiegogo]]) by Michael Larabel on [(12 November 2013)</ref>

## Advertising-supported software 

In order to commercialize FOSS, many companies (including [[Google]([Phoronix]])], [and [[Canonical Ltd|Canonical]([Mozilla]],)]) have moved towards an [model]([economic)] of [software]([advertising-supported)]. For instance, the open-source application [Plus]([AdBlock)] gets paid by Google for letting [''Acceptable Ads'' bypassing the browser ad remover.<ref>{{cite web|url=http://www.neowin.net/news/report-google-paying-adblock-plus-to-not-block-google039s-ads|title=Report: Google paying AdBlock Plus to not block Google's ads |first=John |last=Callaham |date=2013-06-06 |publisher=[[neowin]([whitelist]]ed)].com |accessdate=2013-08-13 |quote=Google is paying money to Eyeo, the company behind AdBlock Plus, so that its ads get through the browser ad remover.}}</ref> As another example is [an open-source project service provider, has the revenue model of advertising banner sales on their website. In 2006, SourceForge reported quarterly takings of $6.5 million<ref>{{cite web|url=http://www.marketwatch.com/story/sourceforge-quarterly-profit-surges-as-revenue-rises |title=Sourceforge quarterly profit surges as revenue rises|accessdate=2013-08-13 |date=2007-05-24 |publisher=marketwatch.com|quote=Software Corp., late Thursday reported third-quarter net earnings of $6.49 million, or 9 cents a share, up from $997,000, or 2 cents a share, during the year-ago period. Pro forma earnings from continuing operations were $2.1 million, or 3 cents a share, compared with $1.2 million, or 2 cents a share, last year. The Fremont, Calif.-based maker of computer servers and storage systems said revenue for the three months ended April 30 rose to $10.3 million from $7.9 million. Analysts, on average, had forecast a per-share profit of 2 cents on revenue of $12 million.|first=Katherine |last=Hunt}}</ref> and $23 million in 2009.<ref>{{cite web | url=http://ir.corp.sourceforge.com/phoenix.zhtml?c=82629&p=irol-newsArticle&ID=1260642&highlight=|title=SourceForge Reports Second Quarter Fiscal 2009 Financial Results}}</ref>

## Selling of optional proprietary extensions 

Some companies sell proprietary but optional extensions, modules, [[Plug-in (computing)|plugins]([SourceForge]],)] or [extension|add-ons]([Browser)] to an open-source software product. This can be a "license conform" approach with many open-source licenses if done technically sufficiently carefully. For instance, mixing proprietary code and open-source licensed code in [linked library|statically linked libraries]([Statically)]<ref name="lgp">{{cite web|url=http://blog.linuxgamepublishing.com/2009/02/08/our-new-way-to-meet-the-lgpl/|archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20090220234542/http://blog.linuxgamepublishing.com/2009/02/08/our-new-way-to-meet-the-lgpl/|archivedate=2009-02-20 |title=Our new way to meet the LGPL |date=2009-02-08|accessdate=2011-03-09 |first=Eskild |last=Hustvedt |quote=You can use a special keyword $ORIGIN to say 'relative to the actual location of the executable'. Suddenly we found we could use -rpath $ORIGIN/lib and it worked. The game was loading the correct libraries, and so was stable and portable, but was also now completely in the spirit of the LGPL as well as the letter!}}</ref> or compiling all source code together in a software product might violate open-source licenses, while keeping them separated by interfaces and [library|dynamic-link libraries]([Dynamic-link)] might often adhere to license conform.

This approach is a variant of the [business model. The proprietary software may be intended to let customers get more value out of their data, infrastructure, or platform, e.g., operate their infrastructure/platform more effectively and efficiently, manage it better, or secure it better. Examples include the [[Linux Technology Center|IBM proprietary Linux software]([freemium]])], where IBM contributes to the Linux open-source ecosystem, but it builds and delivers (to IBM’s paying customers) [software]([database)], [and other software that runs on top of the open-source core. Other examples of proprietary products built on open-source software include [[Red Hat Enterprise Linux]([middleware]],)] and [[[Apache Hadoop]([Cloudera]]'s)]-based software. Some companies appear to re-invest a portion of their financial profits from the sale of proprietary software back into the open source infrastructure.<ref name=MikeOlson2013-11-13/>

Some companies, such as [sell proprietary but optional [[digital electronics]([Digium]],)] hardware controlled by an open-source software product.<ref>[Twenty Years of Experience in Developing Software in Silicon Valley](http://ecorner.stanford.edu/authorMaterialInfo.html?mid=1565), [Polese]([Kim)] lecture to Stanford University engineering entrepreneurship students, 2005.11.09</ref>

## Selling of required proprietary parts of a software product 

A variant of the approach above is the keeping of required data content (for instance a [game]([video)]'s audio, graphic, and other art assets) of a software product proprietary while making the software's source code open-source. While this approach is completely legitimate and compatible with most open-source licenses, customers have to buy the content to have a complete and working software product.<ref name="doom3GPL">{{cite web|url=https://github.com/TTimo/doom3.gpl|quote=Doom 3 GPL source release [This source release does not contain any game data, the game data is still covered by the original EULA and must be obeyed as usual.|title= TTimo/doom3.gpl |publisher=[[GitHub](...])] |accessdate=2013-08-10 |date=2012-04-07}}</ref> Restrictive licenses can then be applied on the content, which prevents the redistribution or re-selling of the complete software product. Examples for open-source developed software are [Creative Artel]([Kot-in-Action)] video game ''Steel Storm'', engine [licensed while the artwork is [[CC-BY-NC-SA]([GPLv2]])] 3.0 licensed,<ref name="steelstorm1">{{cite web|url=http://www.steel-storm.com/ss_license.html|title=STEEL STORM EPISODE 1 LIMITED USER SOFTWARE LICENSE AGREEMENT |quote=For the purpose of this Agreement, the Art Assets include pk3 archive inside of 'steelstorm/gamedata/' folder that contain two-dimensional and three-dimensional works of graphic art, photographs, prints and art reproductions, maps, charts, diagrams, models, and technical drawings, sound effects and musical arrangements, documentation and tutorial videos, and are licensed under Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported license. The Engine, which includes Windows, Linux and Mac binaries, and the Engine's source code, are licensed under GNU GPL v2 license.|publisher=steel-storm.com |accessdate=2013-08-10|date=}}</ref> and ''[& Friends]([Frogatto)]'' with an own developed open-source  engine<ref>{{cite web |url=https://github.com/anura-engine/anura/blob/trunk/LICENSE |date=2015-04-26 |accessdate=2015-10-10 |title=LICENCE |website=anura-engine - GitHub |first=Kristina|last=Simpson}}</ref> and commercialization via the copyrighted game assets<ref>[License](https://github.com/frogatto/frogatto/blob/master/LICENSE) ''"CC-BY 3.0 LICENSE [assets under copyright"'' on github.com/frogatto</ref> for [[iPhone](...])], [and [[MacOS]([BlackBerry]])].<ref>[Humble Indie Bundle's Source Releases](http://freegamer.blogspot.de/2011/04/humble-indie-bundles-source-releases.html) by Iwan Gabovitch ''"Another game which is commercial (on iDevices) and has FOSS code and closed art [is Frogatto."'' (April 22, 2011)</ref><ref>[https://itunes.apple.com/en/app/frogatto/id433338919?mt=12 Frogatto by Lost Pixel](...]) on itunes.apple.com</ref><ref>{{cite web |url=https://itunes.apple.com/app/frogatto/id382015046?mt=8 |title=Frogatto & Friends for iPhone, iPod touch, and iPad on the iTunes App Store |accessdate=2012-03-03}}</ref><ref name=v121>{{cite web |title=BlackBerry App World: Frogatto |url=http://appworld.blackberry.com/webstore/content/95522 |accessdate=16 March 2012}}</ref>

Other examples are ''[Fatalis]([Arx)]'' (by [Studios]([Arkane)])<ref>{{cite web|url=http://bethblog.com/index.php/2011/01/14/arx-fatalis-source-code-patch-released/ |title=Arx Fatalis source code, patch released! |author=Nick|date=2011-01-14 |accessdate=2011-08-10 |publisher=bethblog.com}}</ref> and ''[3-D]([Catacomb)]'' (by [Rock Software]([Flat)])<ref>{{cite web | url = https://www.phoronix.com/scan.php?page=news_item&px=MTcxMjM | title = id Software's Softdisk Open-Sources Some Really Old Games | first = Michael | last = Larabel | date = 6 June 2014 | accessdate = 6 June 2014 | publisher = [}}</ref> with source code opened to the public delayed after release, while copyrighted assets and binaries are still sold on [[gog.com]([Phoronix]])] as [distribution]([digital)].<ref>[Straight out of the Dungeon, Arx Fatalis invades GOG.com](http://www.develop-online.net/press-releases/42722/Arx-Fatalis)</ref><ref>[catacomb pack](https://www.gog.com/game/catacombs_pack) on gog.com</ref>

Doing so conforms with the FSF and Richard Stallman, who stated that for art or entertainment the software freedoms are not required or important.<ref>{{cite web|url=http://stallman.org/articles/online-education.html|title= On-line education is using a flawed Creative Commons license |first=Richard |last=Stallman |publisher=stallman.org |quote=In my view, nonfree licenses that permit sharing are ok for works of art/entertainment, or that present some party's viewpoint (such as this article itself). Those works aren't meant for doing a practical job, so the argument about the users' control does not apply. Thus, I do not object if they are published with the CC-BY-NC-ND license, which allows only noncommercial redistribution of exact copies. |accessdate=2013-08-10|year=2012}}</ref>

The similar [bundling]([product)] of an open-source software product with a proprietary hardware part is called [and legal with most open-source licenses except [[GPLv3]([tivoization]])], which explicitly prohibits this use-case.<ref>{{cite web|url=http://www.fsfeurope.org/projects/gplv3/barcelona-moglen-transcript.en.html#drm|title=Eben Moglen, speaking about GPLv3 in Barcelona}}</ref>

## Re-licensing under a proprietary license 

If a software product uses only own software and open-source software under a [free software licence]([permissive)], a company can re-license the resulting software product under a proprietary license and sell the product without the source code or [Free Software Definition|software freedoms]([The)].<ref>{{cite web|url=http://www.freebsd.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/articles/bsdl-gpl/article.html |title=Why you should use a BSD style license for your Open Source Project - GPL Advantages and Disadvantages|quote=In contrast to the GPL, which is designed to prevent the proprietary commercialization of Open Source code, the BSD license places minimal restrictions on future behavior. This allows BSD code to remain Open Source or become integrated into commercial solutions, as a project's or company's needs change. In other words, the BSD license does not become a legal time-bomb at any point in the development process. In addition, since the BSD license does not come with the legal complexity of the GPL or LGPL licenses, it allows developers and companies to spend their time creating and promoting good code rather than worrying if that code violates licensing. |publisher=[|first=Bruce|last=Montague |date=2013-11-13 |accessdate=2015-11-28}}</ref> For instance, [[Apple Inc.]([FreeBSD]])] is an avid user of this approach by using source code and software from open-source projects. For example, the [Software Distribution|BSD Unix]([Berkeley)] [system]([operating)] kernel (under the [license]([BSD)]) was used in [Inc.|Apple's]([Apple)] [PCs that were sold as proprietary products.<ref>{{cite web|url=http://radar.oreilly.com/2011/08/how-free-software-contributed.html|title=How Free Software Contributed to the Success of Steve Jobs and Apple|first=Andy|last=Oram |date=2011-08-26|publisher=radar.oreilly.com |accessdate=2013-08-10 |quote=the BSD license allowed Apple to keep its changes proprietary}}</ref>

## Obfuscation of source code 

An approach to allow commercialization under some open-source licenses while still protecting crucial business secrets, [[intellectual property]([Macintosh|Mac]])] and technical know-how is [(software)|obfuscation]([Obfuscation)] of source code. This approach was used in several cases, for instance by [in their open-source [[graphic card]([Nvidia]])] device drivers.<ref>[NVIDIA Drops Their Open-Source Driver, Refers Users To VESA Driver](https://www.phoronix.com/scan.php?page=article&item=nvidia_kills_nv&num=1) on [''The xf86-video-nv driver has been around that provides very basic 2D acceleration and a crippled set of features besides that (no proper RandR 1.2/1.3, KMS, power management, etc.) while the code has also been obfuscated to try to protect their intellectual property.''</ref> This practise is used to get the open-source-friendly propaganda without bearing the inconveniences. There has been debate in the free-software/open-source community on whether it is illegal to skirt [[copyleft]([phoronix]])] software licenses by releasing source code in obfuscated form, such as in cases in which the author is less willing to make the source code available. The general consensus was that while unethical, it was not considered a violation.

The [Software Foundation]([Free)], on the other hand, is clearly against this practice.<ref>Obfuscated “source code” is not real source code and does not count as source code. - https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html</ref> The [General Public License]([GNU)] since version 2 has defined "source code" as "the preferred form of the work for making modifications to it." This is intended to prevent the release of obfuscated source code.<ref>{{cite web|url=https://lwn.net/Articles/431651/|title=Reasoning behind the "preferred form" language in the GPL|date=2011-03-07|accessdate=2013-08-19|publisher=lwn.net}}</ref>

## Delayed open-sourcing 

Some companies provide the latest version available only to paying customers. A vendor [(software development)|fork]([Fork)]s a non-[software project then adds closed-source additions to it and sells the resulting software. After a fixed time period the [[Patch (computing)|patch]([copyleft]])]es are released back [(software development)|upstream]([Upstream)] under the same license as the rest of the codebase. This business model is called version lagging or time delaying.<ref name=MikeOlson2013-11-13>Mike Olson (co-founder and CEO of [Software]([Sleepycat)] and [[http://ecorner.stanford.edu/authorMaterialInfo.html?mid=3223 lecture to Stanford University entrepreneurship students]([Cloudera]]),), 2013.11.13</ref><ref>[Phoronix - Towards A Real Business Model For Open-Source Software](https://www.phoronix.com/scan.php?page=article&item=sprewell_licensing) on [
For instance, the [[MariaDB Corporation]([Phoronix]].com</ref>)] created for business compatible "delayed open-sourcing" the [''Business source license'' (BSL)<ref>[https://mariadb.com/bsl bsl]([source-available]]) ''"Change Date: 2019-01-01, Change License: Version 2 or later of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation."'' on mariadb.com (August 2016)</ref> which automatically [after three years to the [[Free and open-source software|FOSS]([Relicensing|relicenses]])] GPL.<ref name="widenius-maxscale">[MySQL daddy Widenius: Open-source religion won't feed MariaDB](http://www.theregister.co.uk/2016/08/24/monty_interview/) on [Register|theregister]([The)].com (August 2016)</ref><ref>[A new release of the MaxScale database proxy -- essential to deploying MariaDB at scale -- features a proprietary license](http://www.infoworld.com/article/3109213/open-source-tools/open-source-uproar-as-mariadb-goes-commercial.html) on [by [[Simon Phipps (programmer)|Simon Phipps]([InfoWorld]])] (Aug 19, 2016)</ref> This approach garantuees for licensees that they have source code access (e.g. for [audit]([code)]s), are not locked into a [platform]([closed)], or suffer from [obsolescence]([planned)], while for the software developer a time-limited exclusive commercialization is possible.<ref name="widenius-maxscale"/>

However, this approach works only with own software or [free software licence|permissive licensed]([Permissive)] code parts, as there is no copyleft FOSS license available which allows the time delayed opening of the source code after distributing or selling of a software product.

## Open sourcing on end-of-life 

An extreme variant of "delayed open-sourcing" is a business practice popularized by [Software]([id)]<ref>[id Software releases Doom 3 source code](https://web.archive.org/web/20131208041324/http://www.h-online.com/open/news/item/id-Software-releases-Doom-3-source-code-1383572.html) on h-online.com (3 November 2011)</ref><ref>[id Software makes iPhone Wolfenstein open source](http://www.pocketgamer.co.uk/r/iPhone/Wolfenstein+3D+Classic/news.asp?c=12324) by Spanner Spencer (March 2009)</ref> and [Realms]([3D)],<ref name="shadowwarriorOSS">[Shadow Warrior Source Code Released](http://legacy.3drealms.com/news/2005/04/shadow_warrior_12.html) 3D Realms (1. April 2005)</ref><ref name="several3DRealmsgamesOSS">[SOURCE CODE](http://legacy.3drealms.com/games.html) ''Selected games have had their source code released by us. These games are: Duke Nukem 3D, Shadow Warrior, Rise of the Triad, Word Whiz, Beyond the Titanic, Supernova, & Kroz. You can obtain these from our downloads page.''</ref> which released several software products under a [software license]([free)] after a long proprietary commercialization time period and the [of investment]([return)] was achieved. The motivation of companies following this practice of releasing the source code when a software reaches the commercial [(product)|end-of-life]([End-of-life)], is to prevent that their software becomes unsupported [or even get lost due to [[digital obsolescence]([Abandonware]])].<ref name="videogaem preservation">{{cite web|url=http://www.gamasutra.com/view/feature/6271/where_games_go_to_sleep_the_game_.php?print=1 |title=Where Games Go To Sleep: The Game Preservation Crisis, Part 1 |first=John |last=Andersen |quote=The existence of decaying technology, disorganization, and poor storage could in theory put a video game to sleep permanently -- never to be played again. Troubling admissions have surfaced over the years concerning video game preservation. When questions concerning re-releases of certain game titles are brought up during interviews with developers, for example, these developers would reveal issues of game production material being lost or destroyed. Certain game titles could not see a re-release due to various issues. One story began to circulate of source code being lost altogether for a well-known RPG, preventing its re-release on a new console. |publisher=[|accessdate=2013-01-10 |date=2011-01-27}}</ref> This gives the [[User community|user communities]([Gamasutra]])] the chance to continue development and support of the software product themselves as an open-source software project.<ref name="timcalltopower2">{{cite web|url=http://timreview.ca/article/294 |title=Opening the Source of Art |date=2009-10-01 |first=John |last=Bell |quote=[no further patches to the title would be forthcoming. The community was predictably upset. Instead of giving up on the game, users decided that if Activision wasn't going to fix the bugs, they would. They wanted to save the game by getting Activision to open the source so it could be kept alive beyond the point where Activision lost interest. With some help from members of the development team that were active on fan forums, they were eventually able to convince Activision to release Call to Power II's source code in October of 2003. |publisher=Technology Innovation Management Review |accessdate=2013-08-09}}</ref> Many examples from the [[video game](...]that)] domain are in the [of commercial video games with later released source code]([list)].

Popular non-game software examples are the [Communicator]([Netscape)] which was open-sourced in 1998<ref name="netscapeopensource">{{cite web|url=http://wp.netscape.com/newsref/pr/newsrelease558.html |archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20070401072854/http://wp.netscape.com/newsref/pr/newsrelease558.html |archivedate=2007-04-01 |date=1998-01-22 |accessdate=2013-08-08 |publisher=[Communications Corporation]([Netscape)] |title=NETSCAPE ANNOUNCES PLANS TO MAKE NEXT-GENERATION COMMUNICATOR SOURCE CODE AVAILABLE FREE ON THE NET |quote=BOLD MOVE TO HARNESS CREATIVE POWER OF THOUSANDS OF INTERNET DEVELOPERS; COMPANY MAKES NETSCAPE NAVIGATOR AND COMMUNICATOR 4.0 IMMEDIATELY FREE FOR ALL USERS, SEEDING MARKET FOR ENTERPRISE AND NETCENTER BUSINESSES}}</ref><ref>{{cite web |url=http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/netscape-celebrates-first-anniversary-of-open-source-software-release-to-mozillaorg-73806207.html |title= MOUNTAIN VIEW, Calif., April 1 /PRNewswire/ -- Netscape Communications and open source developers are celebrating the first anniversary, March 31, 1999, of the release of Netscape's browser source code to mozilla.org |accessdate=2013-01-10 |date=1999-03-31 |quote=[The organization that manages open source developers working on the next generation of Netscape's browser and communication software. This event marked a historical milestone for the Internet as Netscape became the first major commercial software company to open its source code, a trend that has since been followed by several other corporations. Since the code was first published on the Internet, thousands of individuals and organizations have downloaded it and made hundreds of contributions to the software. Mozilla.org is now celebrating this one-year anniversary with a party Thursday night in San Francisco.|publisher=[[Netscape Communications](...])]}}</ref> and [Microsystems]([Sun)]'s [suite]([office)], [which was released in October 2000 at its commercial end of life.<ref>{{cite web|url=http://www.linuxtoday.com/developer/2000101300221NWDTSW |title=StarOffice Code Released in Largest Open Source Project |date=2000-10-13| first=Brian |last=Proffitt |quote=Sun's joint effort with CollabNet kicked into high gear on the OpenOffice Web site at 5 a.m. PST this morning with the release of much of the source code for the upcoming 6.0 version of StarOffice. According to Sun, this release of 9 million lines of code under GPL is the beginning of the largest open source software project ever. |accessdate=2013-01-10 |publisher=linuxtoday.com}}</ref> Both releases formed the basis of important open-source projects, namely the [[Mozilla Firefox]([StarOffice]],)] and [[OpenOffice.org]]/[[LibreOffice]]. However, Firefox eventually gained a more-than-self-sustaining revenue model, so Firefox was not an example of a commercial end-of-life release.

# FOSS and economy 

According to [Benkler]([Yochai)], the Berkman Professor for Entrepreneurial Legal Studies at [Law School]([Harvard)], free software is the most visible part of a new economy of [peer production]([commons-based)] of information, knowledge, and culture. As examples, he cites a variety of FOSS projects, including both free software and open source.<ref>{{cite journal|last=Benkler|first=Yochai|title=Freedom in the Commons: Towards a Political Economy of Information|journal=Duke Law Journal |date=April 2003|volume=52|issue=6|url=http://www.law.duke.edu/shell/cite.pl?52+Duke+L.+J.+1245+pdf}}</ref>

This new economy is already under development. In order to commercialize FOSS, many companies, [being the most successful, are moving towards an [[economic model]([Google]])] of [software]([advertising-supported)]. In such a model, the only way to increase revenue is to make the advertising more valuable. [has recently come under fire for using novel user tracking methods to accomplish this.<ref>{{cite news|url=http://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/facebook-tracking-prompts-calls-for-ftc-investigation/2011/09/29/gIQAVdsP8K_story.html |publisher=[[Washington Post]([Facebook]])]|accessdate=23 October 2011|first=Dina|last=ElBoghdady |author2=Hayley Tsukayama |title=Facebook tracking prompts calls for FTC investigation |date=2011-09-30}}</ref>

This new economy is not without alternatives. Apple's [Store (iOS)|App Stores]([App)] have proven very popular with both users and developers. The Free Software Foundation considers Apple's App Stores to be [compatibility|incompatible]([License)] with its GPL and complained<ref>[vlc-for-ios-vanishes-2-months-after-eruption-of-gpl-dispute.ars](http://arstechnica.com/apple/news/2011/01/vlc-for-ios-vanishes-2-months-after-eruption-of-gpl-dispute.ars) on arstechnica</ref> that Apple was infringing on the GPL with its [terms of use. Rather than change those terms to comply with the GPL, Apple removed the GPL-licensed products from its App Stores.<ref>{{cite web |last=Vaughan-Nichols |first=Steven |title=No GPL Apps for Apple's App Store |url=http://www.zdnet.com/blog/open-source/no-gpl-apps-for-apples-app-store/8046|accessdate=23 October 2011}}</ref> The authors of [[VLC media player|VLC]([iTunes]])], one of the GPL-licensed programs at the center of those complaints, recently began the process to switch from the GPL to the [and [[Mozilla Public License|MPL]([LGPL]])].<ref>{{cite web|title=Changing the VLC engine license to LGPL|url=http://www.videolan.org/press/lgpl.html |accessdate=23 October 2011}}</ref><ref>[VLC under Mozilla public relaunched.](http://arstechnica.com/apple/2013/07/vlc-media-player-returns-to-the-ios-app-store-after-30-month-hiatus/) Accessed 10/10/2013</ref>

# Examples 
 
Much of the Internet runs on open-source software tools and utilities such as [[[Apache HTTP Server|Apache]([Linux]],)], [and [[PHP]([MySQL]],)], known as the [(software bundle)|LAMP stack]([LAMP)] for web servers.{{Citation needed|date=December 2014}} Using open source appeals to software developers for three main reasons: low or no cost, access to [code]([source)] they can tailor themselves, and a shared community that ensures a generally robust code base, with quick fixes for new issues.

Despite doing much business in proprietary software, some companies like [Corporation]([Oracle)] and [participated in developing [[free and open-source software]([IBM]])] to deter from [and take a portion of [[market share]([monopoly|monopolies]])] for themselves.  See [open-source applications]([Commercial)] for the list of current commercial open-source offerings.  [actions were an example of this, and thus [[Mozilla Firefox]([Netscape]]'s)] has become more popular, getting market share from [Explorer]([Internet)].<ref>[Navigator#The fall of Netscape]([Netscape)]</ref>

---

* [Agenda]([Active)] is offered for free, but requires all extensions to be shared back with the world community. The project sells a "Non-Reciprocal Private License" to anyone interested in keeping module extensions private.
* [Systems]([Adobe)] offers [Flex|Flex]([Adobe)] for free, while selling the [Flash Builder|Flash Builder]([Adobe)] [development environment|IDE]([Integrated)].
* [Inc.]([Apple)] offers [(operating system)|Darwin]([Darwin)] for free, while selling [OS X]([Mac)].
* [(PBX)]([Asterisk)], [electronics]([digital)] hardware controlled by open-source software 
* [sells [[CrossOver]([Codeweavers]])] commercially, deriving it from the free [(software)|Wine]([Wine)] project they also back.
* [Ltd.]([Canonical)] offers [(operating system)|Ubuntu]([Ubuntu)] for free, while they sell commercial technical support contracts.
* [[[Apache Hadoop]([Cloudera]]'s)]-based software.  
* Francisco Burzi offers [for free, but the latest version is offered commercially.
* [[DaDaBIK]([PHP-Nuke]])], although following a donationware approach, requires a small, minimum donation fee, to be downloaded.
* [Technology Center|IBM proprietary Linux software]([Linux)], where IBM delivers [software]([database)], [and other software.  
* [[Ingres (database)|Ingres]([middleware]])] is offered for free, but services and support are offered as a subscription.  The Ingres Icebreaker Appliance is also offered as a commercial database appliance.
* [Software]([id)] releases their legacy [engine]([game)]s under the GPL, while retaining proprietary ownership on their latest incarnation.
* [Foundation]([Mozilla)] have a partnership with [and other companies which provides revenue for inclusion of search engines in [[Mozilla Firefox]([Google]])].
* [is offered for free, but with the enterprise version includes support and additional features.
* [[SUSE]([MySQL]])] offers [for free through the [[openSUSE Project]([openSUSE]])], while selling [Linux Enterprise]([SUSE)] (SLE).
* [offers its community edition on SourceForge and an enterprise edition with professional services to enterprises with a paid license
* [[Oracle Corporation|Oracle]([OpenSearchServer]])] - [is free and open to anyone, but the [[Virtualbox#Features only available with the extension pack|VirtualBox extension pack]([VirtualBox]])] can only be used for free at home, thus requiring payment from business users 
* [Foundation]([OWASP|OWASP)] is a professional community of open-source developers focused on raising visible for software security. 
* [Hat]([Red)] sells support subscriptions for [Hat Enterprise Linux]([Red)] (RHEL) which is an enterprise distribution periodically forked from the community-developed [(Linux distribution)|Fedora]([Fedora)].
* [offers [[Snort (software)|Snort]([Sourcefire]])] for free, while selling Sourcefire 3D.
* [Microsystems]([Sun)] ([acquisition by Oracle|acquired by Oracle]([Sun)] in 2010) once offered [for free, while selling [[StarOffice]([OpenOffice.org]])]
* [provides its Lite Package for free, while selling its Standard and Premium Packages by subscription
* [[Zend Technologies]([Untangle]])] offers [Server CE]([Zend)] and [Framework]([Zend)] for free, but sells [Server]([Zend)] with support and additional features.

---

# See also

 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open-source_software

* [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_Software#Business-model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_software#Business-model)
* [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Source_Development_Labs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Source_Development_Labs)
* [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commercial_use_of_copyleft_works](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commercial_use_of_copyleft_works)
* [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Business](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_business)
* [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Innovation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Innovation)

---

Updated Jan 2017 (Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License)

---
